greetings everyone laszlo Montgomery
here bringing you part two of our CHP
overview of the American volunteer group
that are known by many as the Flying
Tigers this episode is going to run much
longer than part one thought I could cut
this cake and two equal halves but the
CHP planning department really messed up
on this one hope you don't mind a last
episode in part one we discussed how
John kai-shek had appointed his wife so
Mayling someone he knew he could trust
to manage the project of building an air
force for China she also had a lot of
connections in DC thanks to her
illustrious brother TV song Japan had
been slamming China mercilessly from the
air since 1937 and although there were
attempts to counter the Japanese air
attacks the Chinese people took a
massive amount of punishment to counter
this the powers that be in Chongqing
began scrambling for a solution Chung's
brother-in-law TV song was able to use
his influential friends in Washington DC
to convince Franklin Delano Roosevelt
even before Pearl Harbor to give the
okay to use Claire Chennault is
essentially a cutout to put together an
all-american outfit that could get
around us neutrality and make a
contribution to halting the progress of
the Japanese in China it's quite an
amazing story how it all got put
together behind the scenes again I
strongly suggest Daniel Ford's book
Flying Tigers Claire Chennault and his
American volunteers 1941 in 1942 that's
from smithsonian books so just in time
for the Marco Polo Bridge incident
Claire Chennault headed out to China
this was right after his retirement from
the army in the summer in 1937 john
kai-shek asked Chanel for an honest
assessment of the Chinese Air Force the
caf after thoroughly assessing a force
should not report it to the
Generalissimo that he didn't have too
much then a noble attempt was made by
Chenault
whip something into shape and over the
next few years he'll move heaven and
earth to train Chinese pilots and build
an effective air force for the Chinese
despite all this great and heroic effort
by Chenault and many others it just
wasn't happening with nowhere else to
turn with the u.s. still neutral the avg
was born and began to assemble in Burma
during the summer and late fall of
nineteen forty one we looked at all that
in the last episode in part one they
didn't have to wait long before the
fireworks started Pearl Harbor of course
was bombed on December 7 1941 with the
intention that this would disable the US
military sufficiently enough whereby
Japan could go in and help themselves to
all the former colonial possessions of
Britain and the Netherlands in the
Philippines to that was an American
controlled territory so at a moment in
history right after Pearl Harbor when
the US was back on its heels it was left
to the avg the American volunteer group
and their curtiss p-40 s to join with
the RAF and the CAF to fight back at a
time when japan's armies were advancing
and seemingly unstoppable with war now
officially declared plans to move ahead
with the second and third avg who we
discussed in the last episode were
scrapped and the first avg simply became
known as the avg three days after Pearl
Harbor Japan had steam rolled into
Thailand and had taken over with
Thailand under Japan's thumb next up on
the list was Burma the avg's first
mission of the war didn't see any combat
this was a only a recon flight over an
airbase in Thailand that showed indeed
Japan was in full control there then on
December twentieth nineteen forty one
the Japanese air force was first
formally introduced to these enemy
aircraft with their shark mouths and
deadly effective dive-bombing techniques
that were just a to defend against
it all started with another routine
could mean bomb run for
group of 10 japanese ki 21s or Sally's
these were the kind of things that the
could mean residents had been putting up
with for a year the air sirens would go
off and everyone just ran for cover
until the Japanese were finished bombing
them Chenault early warning system
picked them up and one of the three
squadrons went up in the air to face
them this was it and this freezing cold
December day the Japanese were welcomed
by for avg fighters for ki 21s would get
blown out of the sky and the other
bombers dumped their payloads short of
their destination and skedaddled back to
their base in Thailand when they landed
and were debriefed they didn't know who
these guys were who were firing on them
the planes had nationalist Chinese
markings were they Chinese or what and
those shark miles painted on the nose
and fuselage dang what's up with that
Chenault had written of that day quote
this was the decisive moment I had been
awaiting for more than four years
American pilots in American fighter
planes aided by a Chinese ground warning
net about to tackle affirmation of the
Imperial Japanese Air Force which was
then sweeping the Pacific skies
victorious everywhere I felt that the
fate of China was riding in the p40
cockpits through the winter esky of your
none I yearned heartily to be ten years
younger and crouched in a cockpit
instead of a dugout tasting the stale
rubber of an oxygen mask and pairing
ahead into the limitless space through
the cherry red rings of a gun sight end
quote the Chinese press had a field day
with this December twentieth battle they
called them the Fae who are flying
tigers the local Chinese were ecstatic
that someone had come to help defend
them against the Japanese essentially on
this date could Ming's was spared a day
of bombing the place was already in
tatters but there was a great morale
booster at a time when a little good
news went a long way the Japanese would
come back again and again but for now
they knew there was no more free ride
and they didn't own the sky
is any longer the reality was that
although the avg schooled the Japanese
this first episode of air combat didn't
go too well the pilots made many
mistakes and allowed most of the
Japanese bombers to get away but Japan
got a black eye from this and they found
out rather quickly who these flying
tigers were well what could they say
anyway the war was on so there was this
big first encounter in December
twentieth and then orders came to get
out of China and head in a southerly
direction to Burma because that was
where the next big battle was going to
be fought if Japan shut down the port of
Rangoon then China was finished as far
as any hopes of overland resupply went
Japanese plan called for Rangoon to be
taken as the first step in their
ultimate conquest of Burma so the avg
left China were sent to go join that
fight they were based in mingle adan and
shared the base with their partner in
this fight the Brewster Buffaloes of the
67th squadron of the RAF and no one told
these guys about the special
relationship that Churchill hadn't yet
coined not much if any cooperation went
on at first in mingle adan the ABG
pilots and crew with their boozing ways
their whoring and their antics in
general really got under the skin of the
Brits at the beginning it was really
nasty between the American skis and the
British but that will change soon
December 23rd the Japanese made their
first bombing raid on Rangoon that shook
everyone up but after the bombers drop
their payloads they ran into a squadron
of avg pilots and six Japanese planes
were shot down to avg pilots also went
down and didn't survive on Christmas Day
1941 the Japanese were intent on bombing
Rangoon into submission just as they had
done with Shanghai this day ended well
for the Flying Tigers in this encounter
the pilots utilized the dive bombing
techniques taught by Chenault for the
first time to avg p-40s were lost but
the pilots survived the head of the
squadron radioed in that
teen Japanese bombers had been downed
and nine fighters the RAF bagged seven
Japanese aircraft but at a loss of six
pilots and nine aircraft it was right
about here where the two unwilling
partners finally came together and began
to share resources and get along as much
as the avg and I RAF were acting as the
fly in the ointment for the Japanese
overall there was no stopping Japan
while Japan might have been suffering
bad losses in the air no one could hold
back their ground troops these RAF and
ABG fighters were in here constantly
during this phase fighting one skirmish
after another to the President of the
United States Chenault had written quote
the American volunteer group which was
authorized by you is happy to report to
the commander in chief that in three
combats it has shot down 29 Japanese
airplanes and has lost only two of its
pilots if furnished with a very small
number of aircraft of proper types and
models and a few more men immediately we
are confident that in cooperation with
the Chinese we can damage and demoralize
the Japanese air force that it will
cease to be a factor in the China Burma
Malaya theater of war any action must be
immediate and must have the full support
of the Allied powers be assured that the
group desires to be of the greatest
service to the general cause in this
brutal unprovoked conflict end quote
once the Japanese army arrived in
Rangoon all they had to do was take it
March 1942 was like Saigon April 1975
anything that could be salvaged for the
future war effort was sent north to
China or west to India whatever couldn't
be saved was destroyed before Japan got
their mitts on it the whole city was put
to the torch to welcome the Japanese
army the Allies evacuated along with
four hundred thousand other Burmese
fleeing to the north there were so much
lend-lease supplies in the port that
they couldn't blow it up fast enough the
Japanese still managed to seize more
than 19,000 tons
of Maidan USA arms and equipment that
we're supposed to go help Jim kai-shek
after locking down Rangoon the
japanese-controlled the Pacific Rim from
Japan to Australia but what a slugfest
the conquest of Burma is going to be
compared to everything else even till
the end of the war the Japanese were
incredulous why was it so hard to take
Burma compared to every other campaign
the way the fight was going in the air
they thought the number of flying tiger
pilots and aircraft was way more than it
actually was but in the end despite all
the heroic effort the Japanese took
Burma Daniel Ford wrote quote at most
the pilots at mingle Adan seemed to have
destroyed 50 Japanese planes in the air
and on the ground up to the fall of
Rangoon many were bombers so the JAF
probably lost upward of 150 Airmen in an
effort to subdue the Allied air force in
South burma by every account the vast
majority fell to guns of the avg end
quote this squadron of the avg got a
well-deserved rest remember the avg was
divided up into three squadrons and when
a fresh new squadron arrived it wasn't
just the same o same o defending against
incoming bombing attacks now the avg
went on the offensive and took the fight
to the japanese two of the three avg
squadrons were still in kunming at this
time a daring raid on a japanese air
base just across the Thai border shocked
the Japanese military since the December
twentieth first encounter with the avg
Japanese Air Force now had way fewer
aircraft on their hands than what the
plan called for this surprise raid
caught the Japanese unaware and strafing
runs did major damage to the planes on
the ground but the next day the Japanese
pilots repaid this debt and in this
encounter the avg for the first and only
time got it worse than they gave
throughout january of 1942 the Japanese
captured all allied bases in Burma and
put everything back together they had
been blown up before they got there and
from these former allied bases they
regularly bombed the port in the city of
rangoon the ABG and RAF fighters went up
to meet them each time and here to air
combat sometimes it seemed the Japanese
had an unending supply of aircraft and
fresh pilots to throw at the allied
pilots and most important they control
the transport links so it was much
easier for the Japanese to get whatever
parts or supplies they needed the avg
didn't enjoy this luxury and the
mechanics had performed miracles to keep
the p-40s in the air to push back
against Japan's air force by middle of
februari the military supply channels
were able to get badly needed parts to
the avg that allowed them to patch up
their aircraft for once although Rangoon
hadn't fallen yet that day was imminent
by the end of februari though it was
time to bail from their bases just
outside of rangoon the british flew to
the old avg base at Qaeda and the avg
squadron fighting in Burma moved north
to maguey and Burma the Japanese were
beginning to get wise to the ways of
these flying tigers now they were much
more careful about how they flew their
bombing missions almost half of the
assets Japan had put in the air had been
lost to RAF and avg fighters the daring
daytime raids by Japan had been too
costly for the time being they decided
to bomb at night only but on March 18
and 19 1942 the avg and RAF made
surprise raids on a Japanese air base in
burma in strafing runs made by to avg
pilots 15 fighter planes were destroyed
on the ground and the british bag 28 the
next day this was another shocking loss
to the Japanese you have to remember up
to this time early nineteen forty two
things hadn't gone to bed for Japan
since the bombing of Pearl Harbor no one
have been able to effectively stand up
to them as sure Japan suffered losses
here and there but pretty much they had
come in and taken everything they wanted
but Burma was proving to be different
and even though they had a large fleet
of aircraft to fight with
the Japanese military planners had
meticulously planned things down to the
individual aircraft in less than two
months into the Burma Campaign the
losses suffered from the avg and the
British RAF attacks were most unexpected
the ripple effect throughout the
planning of this do-or-die offensive by
the Japanese was quite considerable
Churchill had said quote the victories
of the Americans over the rice paddies
of Burma are comparable in character if
not in scope with those one by the RAF
over the hop fields of Kent in the
Battle of Britain end quote something
had to be done and the Japanese
retaliated with a massive air strike on
the air bases at maguey and Qaeda and
Burma 226 bombing sorties later the
mission was accomplished and Chenault
had to find a new air base this was
located in Lloyd way deep in the
mountains of North Burma where Camco had
established a base there to resupply and
repair the Flying Tigers flew there took
stock of their situation and grit their
teeth and anticipation of what lie ahead
it wasn't all bad though while the
Japanese were wailing on mog way the avg
carried out a neat little raid on
japan's base in Chiang Mai in Thailand
Claire Chennault to marquee strategies
that are so often directly attributed to
him were the dive bombing techniques of
the p-40s and the early warning systems
that utilized the limited technology of
the day this early warning system would
give extra minutes and seconds to the
avg pilots to stop whatever it was they
were doing 24 7 jump in there p-40s and
get airborne many planes left on the
ground by the time the bombers arrived
were doomed Chenault being a trained
fighter pilot himself knew the luxury of
a three minute warning before an attack
commenced so should all have this all in
place during this next phase of the war
for the avg based in law we something
else was going on since january of 1942
this is where military politics began to
assert itself into the picture
and our story starts to turn dark grey
this was when vinegar Joe Stillwell
enters our Flying Tiger story still well
of course was featured prominently in
that four-part John service series CHP
episodes 1 15 21 18 he was put in charge
of the CBI theater at this time the
China Burma India theater Chenault and
Stillwell were rivals we all recall from
past podcasts that still well never self
censored anything when he had something
to say and he did not think much of John
kai-shek Uncle Joe did not like jang and
he didn't respect him as a military
leader jang hated still will and
literally had to go to FDR and say
either he goes or I go it came down to
that in the end well Chenault was a
young man so this was a major point of
contention between the two March April
May 1942 the battle of wills between
Stillwell and Chenault will be fought
but in january-february 1942 Stillwell
and Chenault are going to cross swords
almost from the start firstly all these
amazing achievements of the Flying
Tigers had been seized upon by the US
authorities charged with PR whatever
could be milked for propaganda value was
milked to the last drop so Chenault and
his team had quite a bit of shine on
them and you could say his share price
and that of his outfit was riding high
Chenault and his Flying Tiger pilots
were seen in the public eye is quite the
heroes and hot shots and he was a young
man in fact two years after the war ends
Claire Chennault is going to marry chun
qiang may who became known in the
history books as anna Chenault she will
be 90 years old this jun 2015 when
Claire Chennault died in 1958 it was a
national to carry the banner in the USA
for John kai-shek's regime after he lost
the Civil War she was a stalwart in the
china lobby when the only China that
mattered in Washington DC was the one
led by Jim in the 1960s and 70s she was
also away
Republican Party heavyweight
particularly when it came to China so
the main point here is not only were
still well in Chenault rivals from
within the military they totally parted
ways where it came to respect for the
Generalissimo and as I just said
Stillwell was also notoriously
denigrating to the Air Force his
philosophy called for boots on the
ground is the only way to win battles
and wars as far as Stilwell was
concerned the only role the Air Force
played was for reconnaissance and as a
general support role for the soldiers
fighting the battles on the ground so
you could imagine what you know thought
about this line of thinking now I never
mentioned this before but Chenault had a
rival well more like an enemy this was
somebody knew from his days back in
flight training school he was Clayton
Bissell he was part of Stilwell's gang
and from here on out until the avg was
officially closed down on july 4th 1942
he was a stone and Chenault boot time
and again still well we'll keep Chenault
under his thumb by always stacking the
deck so that his man bissell outranked
him and in the military rank means
everything still while pushing on the
side and he figured he was going to be
the one to shove the Japanese back out
of Burma but when all was said and done
and vinegar Joe's army got the
you-know-what kicked out of them and in
april 23rd 1942 they had to make an epic
retreat like macarthur in the
philippines Stilwell had the chance to
make a quick getaway via air but unlike
MacArthur he famously chose to stay with
his troops and personally led a hasty
retreat across Burma into India just
missing annihilation from the Japanese
Stilwell demanda that Chenault order his
pilots to carry out these suicidal recon
missions and air support over the area
of battle then to complicate matters
John kai-shek began issuing
contradictory orders the Chennault got
caught in middle in the end he listened
to his men who are on the verge of
mutiny unless these missions ordered by
Stilwell ceased Chenault old stew
well the missions had to stop he gave
his reasons you can imagine what this
did for their already strained
relationship the whole raison d'etre for
the avg was already finished their deeds
and all the hoopla that surrounded the
Flying Tigers were known throughout the
US military and in the American public
but the time had come to shut this
outfit down and integrate everyone into
the US Armed Services or back into the
armed services since most everyone had
been snatched from one branch of the
military or another while all this was
going on in early nineteen forty-two
Chenault and the avg were still on
china's payroll still accruing their
wages and bonuses from camco so the talk
began to hot up about putting an end to
the state of affairs and getting all
these hot shots into the US army he has
four Chenault against the best wishes of
General George Marshall and General
Henry HAP Arnold the army offered him
the rank of colonel to come back to the
fold Chenault let it be known nothing
less than a star would satisfy him so
they raised him to Brigadier General and
the underlying politics involved
promoting Stilwell's man Clayton Bissell
as well slightly outranking Chenault
when the promotion came the thinking on
high was that no one needed the avg
anymore by taking in all these pilots
and some of the crew it would be a quick
and dirty way for the Army Air Force to
absorb a whole new group of veterans of
air-to-air combat it wasn't a lot of
training the Flying Tiger pilots needed
by April May 1942 with these avg pilots
at scene between december and march was
more action than many of these pilots
would see over the course of the entire
war this is where it got real ugly
considering everything they had gone
through up till now including all the
diseases lousy food miserable jungle
conditions insect infestations the
snakes and always being the last
priority for parts and equipment they
figured the least that would happen
would be that they would return to their
former units may
with some sort of promotion in rank and
recognition for what they had achieved
what they got instead were orders to
join the army air force along with
Chenault the volunteers would come from
the Marines and the Navy to they got
pushed into the army and if they didn't
like it they found out later they could
take their chances with the draft board
back home stateside this is how it was
given to them by no less a person than
Bissell himself they were told and as
undiplomatic away as possible to take it
or leave it Chenault fought to get his
men what they wanted but having sacred
cows like general Marshall and general
Arnold working against you was a
significant handicap so Chenault used
his one and final ace up his sleeve FDR
had instructed Chenault that if he ever
needed him he was granted the authority
to use this private channel so Chenault
wrote the 32nd president and told him
the avg would remain a much more
effective fighting force if left to
continue as they were with him in charge
nobody at that time out trumped FDR so
with his urging they worked out a
compromise as planned the avg would
merge with the Army Air Force as
scheduled on july 4th 1942 and Chenault
would remain in command of the air
forces in China as a one-star general
Chennault commanded the fighters and his
political rival Clayton Bissell took the
Bombers this wasn't what Marshall wanted
but he went along with it when FDR dies
however in april of nineteen forty-five
Chenault big strong buddy will be gone
and he'll be shown the door right quick
but that was all in the future despite
the compromise worked out the damage had
been done to the general morale of the
avg pilots and crew but all were loyal
to Chenault they knew he bled for them
when Chenault gave everyone the news
about the way it was going to be it
spelled the beginning of the end of the
Flying Tigers Japan in a matter of four
to five months had smashed and grabbed
everything in Southeast Asia that once
belonged to the Western colonial powers
the political order of
East Asia since the start of the 20th
century was now turned on its head and
at the most painful moment when Japan
was at its most powerful and was causing
the most death and destruction and there
was little or no good news to report the
deeds of the avg from their first date
of combat on December twentieth till the
outfit was formally closed down helped
keep people's heads up at a time when a
little good news went a long way like a
beacon of hope they were in the right
place at the right time April eighteenth
1942 was Lieutenant Colonel James
Doolittle's famous surprising raid on
Tokyo it wasn't very successful as
daring raids went and under instructions
from Clayton Bissell no one let Chenault
in on the secret when it was already a
done deal Chenault was like Captain
hindsight telling everyone this was a
mistake and they shouldn't have done
this and Chenault knew what was coming
next massive Japanese retaliation if
things weren't bad enough already on the
Chinese coast now the japanese launched
an aggressive campaign inland to destroy
any of these air bases that could be
used to launch bombing raids against the
japanese islands and later on from these
new captured inland air bases the
japanese were able to extend their reach
westward into China is for Burma the
Japanese march north through Burma
towards the China border slowed but was
never stopped and this leads us to one
of the last major battles that the avg
participated in this involved the Battle
of Salween River as I mentioned there
was no stopping the Japanese once they
started marching north through Burma to
the China border though the RAF and avg
were able to land many hard punches all
they really did was slow down Japan's
inevitable taking of Burma all the
Allies sooner or later had to retreat to
safety the avg base at low wing was
taken and the group scattered after the
loss of this airbase the only thing in
the way of China and the Japanese army
was the 1750 mile-long Salween River in
Chinese this river is called a new Chung
it's set
operated northern Burma from Yunnan on
may sixth 1942 the last of the Allies
scooted across the bridge to the China
side and once there the British along
with the Chinese blew the bridge up no
big deal as far as the Japanese were
concerned they started building a
pontoon bridge right away and the 20,000
soldiers rather than continuing their
march into China had to sit around and
chill for a while until the Japanese
engineers rebuilt this bridge so
everyone on the Japanese side of the
river were sort of sitting ducks exposed
with their backs literally up against
the steep cliffs for avg pilots flew to
greet them on may seven 1942 seeing what
was up they promptly destroyed whatever
had had built so far this pontoon bridge
and strafed along the cliffs where the
japanese soldiers were exposed for the
next several days Shin all through
everything he could get his hands on at
these luckless Japanese soldiers it was
a classic turkey shoot and this battle
of Salween River Gorge pushed the
Japanese back away from the good nun
border this would be the one and only
effort by Japan to invade China from
this southern border the defeat of Japan
at the saw Wayne river was a massive
propaganda victory for China everyone
knew the significance of this victory
over the enemy although the Flying
Tigers didn't do this alone they were
sort of singled out in the consciousness
of the local Chinese for what had been
achieved on this same day by the way
America and Japan fought the Battle of
Coral Sea a naval battle that didn't end
in victory but stunned Japan enough so
that a month later when the Battle of
Midway took place they weren't fighting
at optimal conditions then midway we all
know it was a major turning point in the
war in the Pacific then after this
battle of Salween River to make matters
worse for Japan a squad of six avg
pilots flew a deadly surprise raid on
the Japanese occupied golem air base in
Hanoi the devastation was total there
had also been an air raid by the
Japanese
on the city of guilin that had been
repulsed by the avg and then a last one
on the fourth of july where the avg
attacked in a japanese air base in hung
yang in Hunan and these victories in
guilin and hung yung were pretty much
the final victories credited to the
Flying Tigers on jun 20th the people of
gwai lien held a celebration in honor of
the avg and the following proclamation
was made by the local authorities quote
guardians of the air you heroes of the
American Flying Tigers and the Chinese
divine Hawks after our long expectation
and to our great cheerfulness you have
annihilated 11 Japanese vultures in the
air above gwai lean on june thirteenth
this is the most brilliant merit of air
combat that has ever been achieved in
quail in you have once more created your
great glory of extinguishing your enemy
in the air we the three hundred thousand
citizens of gwai lien are especially
delighted we are sure that all the
people of China and all the Allies will
take this to be an everlasting token of
remembrance today we the three hundred
thousand citizens of guellen are
presenting you our heartiest
congratulations and the highest respect
to you let us yell long live the
american flying tigers long live the
chinese divine Hawks long-lived the
cooperation between the USA and china
signed the gwai lean Airmen comforting
evening party the Chinese divine Hawks
were the china version of the Flying
Tigers although the focus of this
podcast is on the avg and the role of
the Americans all along the battles were
being fought in cooperation with Chinese
forces when Independence Day 1942 rolled
around not everyone in the avg stayed on
after the transition in fact most didn't
despite Chenault pleading some just felt
hey man I'm a Marine the heck am I going
to do in the army I'm out of here many
who decided to move on delayed their
departure a couple extra weeks in order
to give Chenault some extra time to
train the latest recruits for this new
twenty-third fighter group but after
paying their due to Chenault to the
extent that they
were willing these avg pilots and crew
made their way back to the USA and dribs
and drabs once they were back in the
states they were able to reenlist in the
service where they felt they belonged
Navy Marines or whatever some had
decided they had had enough of this war
and they took stock of their situation
and decided this would be the perfect
time to get in on the ground floor of
the budding aviation industry as for
Chenault can he moved up to Chun Qiang
where he was based serving much to
general Marshall and Arnold chagrin as
commander of the cATF the China air task
force he did this until March of 1943
and finally after getting his second
start becoming a major general he was
put in charge of the 14th Air Force
there was this bizarre farewell party in
Chongqing that song mailing through for
the avg crew and that many of them went
it rained very hard that night and some
elected to blow it off let me quote from
Daniel for from his book Flying Tigers
quote that evening madam Jung put on a
party for the avgs it was planned as a
barbecue but rain moved it indoors the
guests drink non-alcoholic punch madam
led them in a game of musical chairs and
Chenault was presented with an oil
portrait of himself in the gems at 11pm
the Americans with what relief can only
be imagined drove back through the rain
and mud to their quarters at the
airfield end quote and once FDR passed
away in april nineteen forty-five
Chenault san amis and high places forced
his retirement this was on July eighth
nineteen forty-five a month before the
atomic bombings put in ! on the end of
the war Chenault claimed that 299
japanese aircraft had been destroyed by
his avg fighters of the avg 12 of their
p-40s were shot out of the sky by their
japanese opponents and 61 destroyed on
the ground a third of those planes had
been abandoned by the avg when they
hastily bolted from their base and loy
wing Chenault further claimed another
hundred and fifty three more planes on
top of the 299 were shot down but
could not be proven 23 avg pilots were
killed 10 were shot down three were
killed on the ground and the rest died
and flying accidents camco paid out 260
a to these five hundred dollar bonuses
for Japanese planes destroyed the
Japanese and their propaganda to the
home audience claimed they had shot down
554 these avg planes Chenault only
wished that he had that many to lose
that most throughout the period of the
AVG's existence he was never able to get
more than a dozen or so planes in the
air at any given time but it was the
cooperation between China and the USA
that provided the underlying foundation
that made the overall mission of the avg
a success there was more to it than
shooting down Japanese planes Chinese it
provided all the support in the
construction of airfields runways and
buildings they also man the early
warning systems devised by Chenault and
whenever a Flying Tiger pilot was forced
to bail and parachute to safety time and
again the local Chinese on the ground
found them got them back to safety you
see the Flying Tigers all carried these
so-called blood shits these were notices
that they carried with them about a4
size printed on silk and all the pilots
would sew them on the back of their
flight jackets and if the worst happened
and they got shot down or had to
parachute to safety any literate Chinese
who found them could read the words
printed on that silk young r in life hua
Zhu John June mean et Joe who and it was
signed by the Hong Kong way you're in
play or aviation committee the blood
specifically said quote this
foreigner has come to China to help in
the war soldiers and civilians one in
all should rescue and protect him and it
worked when pilots crashed the local
Chinese on the ground came to the raid
and got them back to the base even if
you couldn't read the characters the
nationalist China flag was prominently
displayed on the blood and people
knew what that was no reward was
promised but civilians knew if they
helped bring a pilot to safety there was
something in it for them
these blood shits were also used
prominently in the Korean War as well
after july 4th 1942 it was all over the
five avg pilots who stayed behind well
they went on to cause even further grief
for Japan as part of the 23rd Fighter
Group as a tribute to these flying
tigers the a-10 warthogs of today's 23rd
Fighter Group are painted with the shark
mouth design that graced the p-40s of
the avg when the war was over Chenault
work closely with Chiang kai-shek to
established a civil air transport or cat
this was a this was a company that ran
all kinds of contract missions for the
government in this organization after
Chenault death went on to become the
infamous air america the outfit made
famous by Mel Gibson and Robert Downey
jr. in the nineteen ninety movie air
america of course covertly owned by our
very own Central Intelligence Agency it
ceased operation in 1976 Chenault till
his dying day remained loyal to john
kai-shek in the kmt regime and he
continued to provide advice throughout
the civil war and after john moved to
taiwan does he lie dying of cancer in
1958 song bailing visited him on his
deathbed not bad for a guy from the
deepest part of the backwoods of
Louisiana and Texas he was a legend in
his own time and ended up a role model
for a lot of people there was no doubt
about his personal love of China on the
bonds he made with so many jungle a
Beijing may have been the money at first
that brought tional to China but he
joined arms with the Chinese for eight
years often at the risk of his life to
help in the war of resistance against
the Japanese his second wife changjiang
may anna Chenault carried his mantle
forward she went on to play all kinds of
interesting roles and business and
government as consultant although her
ties to the chungs were well known Anna
Chenault also had close ties to leaders
in the PRC she was an oft-used
diplomatic back-channel and was useful
to the US government in business for her
ties to both CCP and KMT official
Claire Chennault had written of the avg
quote the group that the experts had
predicted would not last three weeks in
combat had fought for seven months over
Burma China Thailand and French
Indochina destroying 299 planes and
another 153 probably destroyed all of
this with a loss of 12 p-40s in combat
and 61 on the ground including the 22
burned at lloyd way for pilots were
killed in air combat six were killed by
anti-aircraft fire three by enemy bombs
on the ground and three were taken
prisoner 10 more died as a result of
flying accidents although the Japanese
promised on their radio broadcasts to
shoot avg prisoners as bandits they
treated our three prisoners as well as
regular British and American POWs I took
it as an indication of the enemy's
January and respect for our organization
end quote on july 4th 1991 49 years
after they were disbanded the US
government gave the avg members veteran
status in telling this story you may
have noticed haven't mentioned the names
of any of these heroes well almost
everyone it was closely associated with
the avg was a hero in one way or another
there were so many incredibly
interesting men and women on the
periphery of this story if you want more
than this generalized overview of the
avg I suggest to start with Daniel
Ford's book and you'll find resources
abound both amateur and otherwise that'd
make a nice collective history of the
avg the Flying Tigers I'm only going to
name one avg pilot this was a guy by the
name of robert william prescott he was
part of the contingent that opted not to
stay on with Chenault after t-day on
july 4th 1942 prescott made it back to
the states and then continued to serve
his country by flying more than 300
missions over the Burma hump resupplying
bases in China with badly needed
equipment the famous Burma hump over the
Himalayas ran from Dean John in northern
most awesome out of Japan's reach to
could Ming and hewed nan province Bob
Prescott after the war along with a
bunch of former avg pilots founded an
all cargo airline called a Flying Tiger
line he leveraged his fame all his
military connections and bet big on the
air cargo industry he became wildly
successful than later on took the
company public 1989 the Flying Tiger
line was purchased by Federal Express
now of course known as FedEx and it was
from these routes acquired from the
Flying Tiger line purchase that allowed
fedex to become the international
logistics powerhouse that they are today
and believe it or not my first job on a
college was with this company my cousin
Dennis who just last year retired from
the company after more than three
decades hooked me up with my first job
and may I say if it had been legal to
use chimpanzees to do the work I had to
do they could have done it but hey you
got to start somewhere I guess I spent
eight years there my whole 20s and
worked my way up the ranks to middle
management a month after fedex
officially took over the Flying Tiger
line in August 1989 I bought a one-way
ticket to Hong Kong and ended up working
out there for nine years and when I was
in Chengdu last year in September 2014 I
went to the gym chuan museum complex and
saw the avg Museum buffet hoochie pink
one chengdu real estate mogul dr. Fong
jinchuan has put together this whole
cluster of museums that all focus on
recent Chinese histories just south of
Chengdu the whole place was just
fantastic and I'm gonna visit again but
I'm going to stay for a couple of days
to take in all 18 of these museums next
time you're in Chengdu go check the
place out if you enjoy looking at
Cultural Revolution Kishin memorabilia
this is the ultimate place the gent wan
museum complex i'll put a link to that
on my website and to show you the
amazing power of the Lazlo Montgomery
name and that of the humble China
history podcast I was able to obtain all
VIP treatment when I was there this
included getting to meet the great man
himself on jinchuan I got to chat with
him for a while and
tell him about the CHP we had lunch
together and all the time just flew by
what an electrifying man i just feel his
energy just standing next to him in the
Flying Tiger Museum dr. fun had large
photos of all the avg pilots on this
huge massive wall and there he was Bob
Prescott he had shut down between five
and six Japanese planes I told dr. fond
that although he had already passed away
when i joined he was the boss from my
first company I worked for out of
college he was so impressed that he
mentioned meeting me in his way bond
that I had worked for you know one of
the Flying Tiger pilots into this China
history show he sure got a kick out of
that he asked me to get the word out to
all collectors of Flying Tiger
memorabilia if you're looking for a home
for your collection consider his museum
he'll find a good place for it and allow
the hundreds and hundreds of thousands
of Chinese and foreigners who visit
every year to see and learn about the
story of the avg so that my little
beauties is going to be that I hope over
these two episodes that you were able to
understand the story of the avg and the
role they play not only in World War two
but helping to create long-lasting good
relations between China and the US
imagine at the outset of part one that
there were plenty of past incidents that
have shaken us-china relations but will
always have this shared past history to
look back on it showed genuine
friendship and cooperation not only will
we in the United States always remember
the heroic deeds of these men and women
so will the people of China this is
laszlo Montgomery signing off from the
city Los Angeles California please
consider joining me next time won't you
for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast